Clarity/organization/style/grammar edits to Therapeutics (#835)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/20.pharmaceuticals.md

### Abstract

After emerging in China in late 2019, the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 spread worldwide and as of early 2021, continues to significantly impact most countries.

> Only a small number of coronaviruses are known to infect humans, and only two are associated with the severe outcomes associated with SARS-CoV-2: SARS-CoV-1, a sister species of SARS-CoV-2 that emerged in 2002, and MERS-CoV, which emerged in 2012.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only a small number of coronaviruses are known to infect humans, and only two are associated with the severe outcomes associated with SARS-CoV-2: SARS-CoV-1, a related species of SARS-CoV-2 that emerged in 2002, and MERS-CoV, which emerged in 2012.
```

The COVID-19 pandemic is a rapidly evolving crisis.
With the worldwide scientific community shifting focus onto the SARS-CoV-2 virus and the disease it causes, a large number of possible pharmaceutical approaches for treatment and prevention have been proposed.
What is known about each of these potential interventions evolved rapidly throughout 2020 and early 2021.
In March 2020, we began monitoring a range of candidates and have continued to update this manuscript as new information has become available.
Some therapeutics have been supported, others have been revealed to be unlikely to confer any therapeutic benefits, and most require more data before a conclusion can be drawn.
This rapidly changing area of research provides important insight into how the ongoing pandemic can be managed and also demonstrates the power of interdisciplinary collaboration to rapidly understand a virus and match its characteristics with existing or novel pharmaceuticals.

### Introduction

The novel coronavirus _Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus 2_ (SARS-CoV-2) emerged in late 2019 and quickly precipitated the worldwide spread of novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).

> COVID-19 is associated with symptoms ranging from none (asymptomatic) to mild to severe, with approximately 2% of patients dying from COVID-19-related complications, such as acute respiratory disease syndrome (ARDS) [@arxiv:2102.01521].

Author: Awesome! That makes total sense.

> COVID-19 is associated with symptoms ranging from none (asymptomatic) to mild to severe, with approximately 2% of patients dying from COVID-19-related complications, such as acute respiratory disease syndrome (ARDS) [@arxiv:2102.01521].

Reviewer 2: This should be done with bbf16ae54ab9f0e1c23b7f8c8731a33eb25290f1 and 634555ede73f98ee0839b4848dde993a82e6b183.  I'll double check the build when it finishes.

At the time that SARS-CoV-1 emerged, no new HCoV had been identified in almost 40 years [@doi:10.1038/nrmicro.2016.81].
The identity of the virus underlying the SARS disease remained unknown until April of 2003, when the SARS-CoV-1 virus was characterized through a worldwide scientific effort spearheaded by the WHO [@doi:10.1038/nrmicro.2016.81].
In contrast, the SARS-CoV-2 genomic sequence was released on January 3, 2020 [@doi:10.46234/ccdcw2020.017], only days after the international community became aware of the novel pneumonia-like illness now known as COVID-19.
While SARS-CoV-1 belonged to a distinct lineage from the two other HCoV known at the time of its discovery [@doi:10.1093/ajcp/aqaa029], SARS-CoV-2 is closely related to SARS-CoV-1 and a more distant relative of another HCoV characterized in 2012, _Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus_ [@doi:10/ggjr43; @doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1211721].
Thus, despite their phylogenetic similarity, the viruses have different characteristics relevant to their spread, and the SARS-CoV-2 virus emerged under very different circumstances than SARS-CoV-1 in terms of scientific knowledge about HCoV.

> 

Author: I believe I fixed this now!

In summary, N3 is a computationally designed molecule that inhibits the viral transcription through inhibiting Mpro.
Ebselen is both a strong Mpro inhibitor and strong inhibitor of viral replication _in vitro_ that was found to reduce SARS-CoV-2 viral load even more effectively than N3.
Ebselen is a very promising compound since its safety has been demonstrated in other indications.

> However, Ebselen could prove to be a false positive since it is a promiscuous compound that can have many targets [@doi:10.1039/c8cc04258f].

Author: That makes sense, happy to change it back!
```suggestion
However, Ebselen is likely to be a false positive since it is a promiscuous compound that can have many targets [@doi:10.1039/c8cc04258f].
```

Traditionally, viral targets have been favored for pharmaceutical interventions because altering host processes is likely to be less specific than targeting the virus directly [@doi:10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.03.020].
On the other hand, targeting the host offers potential for a complementary strategy to antivirals that could broadly limit the ability of viruses to replicate [@doi:10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.03.020].
As a result, therapeutic approaches that target host proteins have become an area of interest for SARS-CoV-2.
Viral entry receptors in particular have been identified as a potential target.

> Entry of SARS-CoV-2 into the cell depends on binding to the Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor, which is catalyzed by the enzyme encoded by _TMPRSS2_ [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Entry of SARS-CoV-2 into the cell depends on binding to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor, which is catalyzed by the enzyme encoded by _TMPRSS2_ [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052].
```

The results indicated that short-term use of HCQ was not associated with additional risk, but that HCQ + AZ was associated with an enhanced risk of cardiovascular complications (15-20% increased risk of chest pain) and a two-fold increased risk of mortality.
Therefore, whether studies utilize HCQ alone or HCQ in combination with a macrolide may be an important consideration in assessing risk.
As results from initial investigations of these drug combinations have emerged, concerns about the efficacy and risks of treating COVID-19 with HCQ and CQ has led to the removal of CQ/HCQ from SOC practices in several countries [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.07.20056424; @url:https://www.cnn.com/2020/04/13/health/chloroquine-risks-coronavirus-treatment-trials-study/index.html].

> As of May 25, 2020, WHO had suspended administration of HCQ as part of the worldwide Solidarity Trial [@raw:WHO_briefing_2020_5_25], and later the final results of this large-scale trial that compared 947 patients administered HCQ to 906 controls revealed no effect on the primary outcome, mortality during hospitalization (rate ratio: 1.19; _p_=0.23)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As of May 25, 2020, WHO had suspended administration of HCQ as part of the worldwide Solidarity Trial [@raw:WHO_briefing_2020_5_25], and later the final results of this large-scale trial that compared 947 patients administered HCQ to 906 controls revealed no effect on the primary outcome, mortality during hospitalization (rate ratio: 1.19; _p_ = 0.23)
```

The primary outcome analyzed was all-cause mortality, and patient vital statistics were reported by physicians upon discharge or death, or else at 28 days following HCQ administration if they remained hospitalized.
The secondary outcome assessed was the combined risk of progression to invasive mechanical ventilation or death within 28 days.
By the advice of an external data monitoring committee, the HCQ arm of the study was reviewed early, leading to it being closed due a lack of support for HCQ as a treatment for COVID-19.
Patients who received HCQ had a longer duration of hospitalization than patients receiving usual care, were less likely to be discharged alive within 28 days, and were more likely to progress to mechanical ventilation.
This large-scale study thus builds upon studies in the United States and China to suggest that HCQ is not an effective treatment, and in fact may negatively impact COVID-19 patients due to its side effects.
The rates of COVID-19-related mortality reported in the RECOVERY trial did not differ between the control and HCQ arms, but patients receiving HCQ were more likely to die due to cardiac events.

> Therefore, though none of the studies have been blinded, taking all of the available evidence together makes it clear that the available evidence points to significant dangers associated with the administration of HCQ to hospitalized COVID-19 patients, without providing any support for its efficacy.

Author: ```suggestion
Therefore, though none of the studies have been blinded, examining them together makes it clear that the available evidence points to significant dangers associated with the administration of HCQ to hospitalized COVID-19 patients, without providing any support for its efficacy.
```

The study retrospectively investigated the effect of the administration of HCQ (n=97), HCQ + AZ (n=113), and no HCQ (n=158) on 368 patients.
The primary outcomes assessed were death and the need for mechanical ventilation.
Standard supportive care was rendered to all patients.
Due to the low representation of women (N=17) in the available data, the analysis included only men, and the median age was 65 years.
The rate of death in the HCQ-only treatment condition was 27.8% and in the HCQ + AZ treatment condition, it was 22.1%.
In comparison to the 14.1% rate of death in the no-HCQ cohort, these data indicated a statistically significant elevation in the risk of death for the HCQ-only group compared to the no-HCQ group (adjusted HR: 2.61, p=0.03), but not for the HCQ + AZ group compared to the no-HCQ group (adjusted HR: 1.14; p=0.72).

> Further, the risk of ventilation was similar across all three groups (adjusted HR: 1.43, _p_=0.48 (HCQ) and 0.43, _p_=0.09 (HCQ + AZ) compared to no HCQ).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Further, the risk of ventilation was similar across all three groups (adjusted HR: 1.43, _p_ = 0.48 (HCQ) and 0.43, _p_ = 0.09 (HCQ + AZ) compared to no HCQ).
```

###### Prophylactic Administration of HCQ

An initial study of the possible prophylactic application of HCQ utilized a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled design to analyze the administration of HCQ prophylactically [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2016638].
Asymptomatic adults in the United States and Canada who had been exposed to SARS-CoV-2 within the past four days were enrolled in an online study to evaluate whether administration of HCQ over five days influenced the probability of developing COVID-19 symptoms over a 14-day period.
Of the participants, 414 received HCQ and 407 received a placebo.

> No significant differences in the rate of symptomatic illness was observed between the two groups (11.8% HCQ, 14.3% placebo, _p_=0.35).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
No significant difference in the rate of symptomatic illness was observed between the two groups (11.8% HCQ, 14.3% placebo, _p_ = 0.35).
```

> The HCQ condition was associated with side effects, with 40.1% of patients reporting side effects compared to 16.8% in the control group (_p_ <0.001).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The HCQ condition was associated with side effects, with 40.1% of patients reporting side effects compared to 16.8% in the control group (_p_ < 0.001).
```

Initially it was hypothesized that CQ/HCQ might be effective against SARS-CoV-2 in part because CQ and HCQ have both been found to inhibit the expression of CD154 in T-cells and to reduce TLR signaling that leads to the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines [@doi:10.1038/s41584-020-0372-x].
Clinical trials for COVID-19 have more often used HCQ rather than CQ because it offers the advantages of being cheaper and having fewer side effects than CQ.
However, research has not found support for an effect of HCQ on COVID-19 patients.
Multiple clinical studies have already been carried out to assess HCQ as a therapeutic agent for COVID-19, and many more are in progress.
To date, none of these studies have used randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled designs with a large sample size, which would be the gold standard.
Despite the design limitations (which would be more likely to produce false positives than false negatives), initial optimism about HCQ has largely dissipated.

> The most methodologically rigorous HCQ-focused analysis to date [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2016638] evaluated the prophylactic potential of HCQ and found no significant differences between the treatment and control groups, and the WHO's global Solidarity trial similarly reported no effect of HCQ on mortality.

Author: ```suggestion
The most methodologically rigorous analysis of HCQ as a prophylactic [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2016638] found no significant differences between the treatment and control groups, and the WHO's global Solidarity trial similarly reported no effect of HCQ on mortality [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2023184].
```

HCQ use for COVID-19 could also lead to shortages for anti-malarial or anti-rheumatic use, where it has documented efficacy.
Despite significant early attention, these drugs appear to be ineffective against COVID-19.
Several countries have now removed CQ/HCQ from their SOC for COVID-19 due to the lack of evidence of efficacy and the frequency of adverse effects.

##### Dexamethasone

Dexamethasone (9α-fluoro-16α-methylprednisolone) is a synthetic corticosteroid that binds to glucocorticoid receptors [@doi:10.1021/cr068203e; @url:https://www.cebm.net/covid-19/dexamethasone/].
It was first synthesized in the late 1950s as an anti-inflammatory and has been used to treat RA and other inflammatory conditions [@doi:10.1021/ja01545a061; @doi:10.1001/jama.1960.03030070009002].
Steroids such as dexamethasone are widely available and affordable, and they are often used to treat community-acquired pneumonia [@doi:10.1038/s41392-020-0127-9].
A clinical trial that began in 2012 recently reported that dexamethasone may improve outcomes for patients with ARDS [@doi:10/ggpxzc].

> However, a meta-analysis of a small amount of available data about dexamethasone as a treatment for SARS suggested that it may, in fact, be associated with patient harm [@doi:10/ggks86]; however, these findings may have been biased by the fact that all of the studies examined were observational and a large number of inconclusive studies were not included [@doi:10/ggq356].

Author: This is early-2000s SARS/SARS-CoV-1!

> However, a meta-analysis of a small amount of available data about dexamethasone as a treatment for SARS suggested that it may, in fact, be associated with patient harm [@doi:10/ggks86]; however, these findings may have been biased by the fact that all of the studies examined were observational and a large number of inconclusive studies were not included [@doi:10/ggq356].

Reviewer 2: Should we replace "SARS" with "SARS-CoV-1" here?  I don't recall what nomenclature rules you've been using.

> However, a meta-analysis of a small amount of available data about dexamethasone as a treatment for SARS suggested that it may, in fact, be associated with patient harm [@doi:10/ggks86]; however, these findings may have been biased by the fact that all of the studies examined were observational and a large number of inconclusive studies were not included [@doi:10/ggq356].

Author: This is for SARS the disease, not SARS the virus, so I believe this nomenclature is ok! Does it need to be rephrased to make that distinction?

> However, a meta-analysis of a small amount of available data about dexamethasone as a treatment for SARS suggested that it may, in fact, be associated with patient harm [@doi:10/ggks86]; however, these findings may have been biased by the fact that all of the studies examined were observational and a large number of inconclusive studies were not included [@doi:10/ggq356].

Reviewer 2: No, I see what you mean now and "treatment for SARS" makes it clear it is the disease.  I was reading too quickly.

###### Summary of HCQ/CQ Research Findings

Early _in vitro_ evidence indicated that HCQ could be an effective therapeutic against SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19, leading to significant media attention and public interest in its potential as both a therapeutic and prophylactic.
Initially it was hypothesized that CQ/HCQ might be effective against SARS-CoV-2 in part because CQ and HCQ have both been found to inhibit the expression of CD154 in T-cells and to reduce TLR signaling that leads to the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines [@doi:10.1038/s41584-020-0372-x].
Clinical trials for COVID-19 have more often used HCQ rather than CQ because it offers the advantages of being cheaper and having fewer side effects than CQ.

> However, research has not found support for an effect of HCQ on COVID-19 patients.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, research has not found support for a positive effect of HCQ on COVID-19 patients.
```

As a result, guidelines early in the pandemic typically recommended avoiding treating COVID-19 patients with corticosteroids such as dexamethasone [@doi:10/ggks86].

The application of dexamethasone for the treatment of COVID-19 was evaluated as part of the multi-site RECOVERY trial in the United Kingdom [@doi:10.1101/2020.06.22.20137273].
Over 6,000 hospitalized COVID-19 patients were assigned into the SOC or treatment (dexamethasone) arms of the trial with a 2:1 ratio.
At the time of randomization, some patients were ventilated (16%), others were on non-invasive oxygen (60%), and others were breathing independently (24%).
Patients in the treatment arm were administered dexamethasone either orally or intravenously at 6 mg per day for up to 10 days.
The primary end-point was the patient's status at 28-days post-randomization (mortality, discharge, or continued hospitalization), and secondary outcomes analyzed included the progression to invasive mechanical ventilation over the same period.

> The 28-day mortality rate was found to be lower in the treatment group than in the SOC group (21.6% vs 24.6%, _p_ <0.001).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The 28-day mortality rate was found to be lower in the treatment group than in the SOC group (21.6% vs 24.6%, _p_ < 0.001).
```

> The 28-day mortality rate was found to be lower in the treatment group than in the SOC group (21.6% vs 24.6%, p <0.001).

Reviewer: p in italics? Saw that in other parts of the manuscript

Author: ```suggestion
The 28-day mortality rate was found to be lower in the treatment group than in the SOC group (21.6% vs 24.6%, _p_ <0.001).
```

For example, one of the largest retrospective, observational analysis released to date [@doi:10/d2pk] compared the rates at which patients who received TCZ deceased or progressed to invasive medical ventilation over a 14-day period compared to patients receiving only SOC.
Under this definition, SOC could include other drugs such as HCQ, azithromycin, lopinavir-ritonavir or darunavir-cobicistat, or heparin.
While this study was not randomized, a subset of patients who were eligible to receive TCZ were unable to obtain it due to shortages; however, these groups were not directly compared in the analysis.

> After adjusting for variables such as age, sex, and SOFA (sequential organ failure assessment) score, they found that patients treated with TCZ were less likely to progress to invasive medical ventilation and/or death (adjusted HR = 0.61, CI 0.40-0.92, _p_=0.020), although analysis of death and ventilation separately suggests that this effect may have been driven by differences in the death rate (20% of control versus 7% of TCZ-treated patients).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After adjusting for variables such as age, sex, and SOFA (sequential organ failure assessment) score, they found that patients treated with TCZ were less likely to progress to invasive medical ventilation and/or death (adjusted HR = 0.61, CI 0.40-0.92, _p_ = 0.020), although analysis of death and ventilation separately suggests that this effect may have been driven by differences in the death rate (20% of control versus 7% of TCZ-treated patients).
```

Taken together, these findings suggest that future clinical trials of TCZ may want to include intubation as an endpoint.
However, these studies should be approached with caution, not only because of the small number of patients enrolled and the retrospective design, but also because they performed a large number of statistical tests and did not account for multiple hypothesis testing.
These last findings highlight the need to search for a balance between impairing a harmful immune response, such as the one generated during CRS and CSS, and preventing the worsening of the clinical picture of the patients by potential new viral infections.

Though data about TCZ for COVID-19 is still only just emerging, some meta-analyses and systematic reviews have investigated the available data.
One meta-analysis [@doi:10.2139/ssrn.3642653] evaluated 19 studies published or released as preprints prior to July 1, 2020 and found that the overall trends supportive of the frequent conclusion that TCZ does improve survivorship, with a significant HR of 0.41 (_p_<0.001).
This trend improved when they excluded studies that administered a steroid alongside TCZ, with a significant HR of 0.04 (_p_<0.001).

> They also found some evidence for reduced invasive ventilation or ICU admission, but only when excluding all studies except a small number whose estimates were adjusted for the possible bias introduced by the challenges of stringency during the enrollment process.

Author: That paper doesn't use the acronym IMV at all so I couldn't figure out what it was supposed to mean! They refer to both "invasive ventilation" and "mechanical ventilation" so one of those seems safer to use!

In contrast, a study that compared 96 patients treated with TCZ to 97 patients treated with SOC only in New York City found that differences in mortality did not differ between the two groups, but that this difference did become significant when intubated patients were excluded from the analysis [@doi:10.1093/qjmed/hcaa206].
Taken together, these findings suggest that future clinical trials of TCZ may want to include intubation as an endpoint.
However, these studies should be approached with caution, not only because of the small number of patients enrolled and the retrospective design, but also because they performed a large number of statistical tests and did not account for multiple hypothesis testing.
These last findings highlight the need to search for a balance between impairing a harmful immune response, such as the one generated during CRS and CSS, and preventing the worsening of the clinical picture of the patients by potential new viral infections.

Though data about TCZ for COVID-19 is still only just emerging, some meta-analyses and systematic reviews have investigated the available data.

> One meta-analysis [@doi:10.2139/ssrn.3642653] evaluated 19 studies published or released as preprints prior to July 1, 2020 and found that the overall trends supportive of the frequent conclusion that TCZ does improve survivorship, with a significant HR of 0.41 (_p_<0.001).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One meta-analysis [@doi:10.2139/ssrn.3642653] evaluated 19 studies published or released as preprints prior to July 1, 2020 and found that the overall trends were supportive of the frequent conclusion that TCZ does improve survivorship, with a significant HR of 0.41 (_p_ < 0.001).
```

> This trend improved when they excluded studies that administered a steroid alongside TCZ, with a significant HR of 0.04 (_p_<0.001).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This trend improved when they excluded studies that administered a steroid alongside TCZ, with a significant HR of 0.04 (_p_ < 0.001).
```

![
**Mechanism of Action for Potential Therapeutics**
Potential therapeutics currently being studied can target the SARS-CoV-2 virus or modify the host environment through many different mechanisms.
Here, the relationship between the virus and several therapeutics described above are visualized.
](images/N001-LifeCyclePlusDrugs.png){#fig:therapeutics secno=1}

> Insights into the pathogenesis of and immune response to SARS-CoV-2 (see [@arxiv:2102.0152]) have also guided the identification of potential prophylactics and therapeutics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Insights into the pathogenesis of and immune response to SARS-CoV-2 (see [@individual-pathogenesis]) have also guided the identification of potential prophylactics and therapeutics.
```
